---
title: "Power"
date: "2008-05-15"
author: tom
---

I remember being young (no older than eleven, as my parents' divorce was still in court) and wondering what power was.  I was thinking about it in a purely one-on-one sense, if someone told me to do something, what was it that made me do it?  This led to the question of whether someone could force you to do something.  I didn't have an answer for it then, but while I was reading an article about the [lies that we tell our children](http://www.paulgraham.com/lies.html) (which is a good read, by the way), something clicked.  No matter the situation, power is an agreement.  Whenever someone (or a group) instructs you to do something either directly or indirectly, you have a choice.

The parties in the agreement are not always equal, for example when the government tells you to pay your taxes, you can refuse, but you will probably go to prison.  The natural reasoning that comes out of this is that society is held together by a bunch of agreements, a sort of social fabric.  This in turn brings up several issues.  First, our society is much more stable than, say Roman society, with relatively few coups and such.  My only thought is that perhaps as society is more complex than it was then, that the social fabric is more resilient than it was back then (or possibly that the coups are simply more subtle).  The second is that there must be a limit to the resiliency of the social fabric.  For example, with measures such as the PATRIOT Act, the agreement between the government and it's constituents has been severely altered.  The government has removed it's responsibilities to its citizens while doing nothing to relieve citizens' responsibilities.

The theme of power and responsibility is one that I am quite fascinated with, and that I have started to explore in [Uprising]({% link _stories/uprising.md %}), but it feels good to make it explicit.  For those of you who are more familiar with the philosophical canon than I am, I apologize for going over topics that have doubtlessly been covered at great depth by better minds than mine.
