---
title: "Updates"
date: "2019-11-14"
author: tom
---

Despite the complete lack of activity on here for the past couple of years, I'm not dead! Here's a brief overview of what I've been up to:

- I've been following that goal I set for myself a few years back of going easier on myself. Unfortunately, a big part of that has been making a conscious effort not to overextend myself, hence my silence here. That being said, things have been going pretty well in life offline but I won't bore you with the details.
- I spent the last year-and-a-half playing Magic: The Gathering. I played in high school, then gave it up and got rid of all my cards. After randomly picking up a copy of Generation Decks at the library last year, I got back into it. However, I'm a bit burned out on Magic again (though this time I won't be getting rid of my cards).
- Currently I've been playing Android: Netrunner, which is also a card game, but this one no longer supported by its publisher. This may sound like a downside, but I'm actually thinking that it may be a positive for me since the fan community has taken it over and I think what was annoying me about Magic was the decisions that resulted from the profit motive. Last week I wrote an [Android: Netrunner New Player Guide]({{ site.baseurl }}/projects/netrunner-new-player-guide.html).
- I haven't been doing any writing recently, but I have a couple of ideas for projects to work on next year. In the next week or two, I plan on making There Are No Words into a proper story page on the site.
- I updated the site's theme to something a bit more modern with better mobile support. It looks like it may have broken some of my formatting though (particularly in lists), so sorry about that. I'll continue to work on it.
