---
layout: post
author: tom
title: Old Man Yells at TV - March 2020
---
Thanks to the global pandemic and general collapse of society, I have been able to watch more movies than usual. Here’s what I watched last month:

**Spies in Disguise** – Rewatch, saw it in theaters and it is still awesome. It can feel a bit preachy at times, but not excessively so, in my opinion.

**Forks Over Knives** – My doctor suggested that I watch this, and damnit I don’t want to stop eating meat, but I may have to. This is problematic. The documentary could have been better put together, however. I think that it would have been better if they went through a piece of science completely then did a case study moving on to another piece of science, but instead it felt like things were unnecessarily drawn out, with a piece of information introduced then not actually dealt with until a bunch of other stuff had happened. Even so, it was compelling.

**Jumanji 2: The Next Level** – Watching The Rock do a Danny Devito impression was surprisingly fun, which is an apt metaphor for my feelings about the movie as a whole. I enjoyed it more than I felt I should.

**The Game Changers** – Okay, another movie about eating plants. This one was better put together, both in terms of production value (higher quality video) and presentation (it felt like they did a better job of presenting science, showing an example, then drawing conclusions than in Forks Over Knives). It was compelling and enjoyable, but I didn’t really care for the appeal to traditional masculinity (though I can totally see why that choice was made). This movie ended up moving me even farther into the plant based diet category.

**Angry Birds 2** – This was second or third time watching this. Not as good as the original, but still fun.

**The BFG** – Fun, but it didn’t quite live up to my memories of enjoying the book 30-ish years ago.

**Ford v. Ferrari** – Fun, and deeper than expected, but I didn’t love it as much as I expected to. [Full Review]({{ site.baseurl }}/2020/03/31/ford-v-ferrari.html).
